---
SOURCE: local_offline_pdf
DOMAIN: epfo
CATEGORY: rules
LAST_UPDATED: 2026-03-09
LANGUAGE: English
---

[Employee's Deposit-Linked Insurance Scheme, 1976]

[CONTENT]
1 | P a g e  
 
THE EMPLOYEE’S DEPOSIT LINKED  
INSURANCE SCHEME, 1976 
 
G.S.R.  488 (E). – In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 6C of the Employees’ 
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952), the Central 
Government hereby makes the following Scheme, namely: 
 
 
CHAPTER 1 
 
PRELIMINARY 
 
1. Short title, commencement and application – (1) The Scheme may be called the 
Employees‟ Deposit-Linked Insurance Scheme, 1976. 
 
(2) The provisions of this Scheme shall come into force on the 1st day of August, 1976. 
 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 16 and section 17 (2A) of the 
Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, this Scheme shall apply to 
the employees of all factories and other establishments [to which the said Act applies:] 
 
Provided that the provisions of this Scheme shall not apply to tea factories in the State of 
Assam. 
 
2. Definitions. – In this Scheme, unless the context otherwise requires, – 
 
(a) “Act” means the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 
(19 of 1952). 
 
(b) “Assurance benefit” means a payment linked to the average balance in the Provident 
Fund Account of an employee, payable to a person belonging to his family or otherwise entitled to 
it in the event of death of the employee while being a member of the Fund. 
 
(c) All other words and expressions used herein but not defined shall have the meaning 
respectively assigned to them in the Act or Employees’ Provident Funds Scheme, 1952. 
 
3. Administration of the Scheme. – This Scheme shall be administered by the Central 
Board constituted under section 5A of the Act. 
 
4. Regional Committee – The Regional Committee set up under paragraph 4 of the 
Employees’ Provident Funds Scheme, 1952 shall advise the Central Board on such matters, in 
relation to the administration of this Scheme, as the Central Board may refer to it from time to time 
and in particular, on: - 
 
(a) Progress of recovery of contributions, under this Scheme, both from factories and 
establishments exempted under Section 17 of the Act and other factories and 
establishments covered under the Act; and 
 
(b) Expeditious disposal of prosecutions. 
 
5. Delegation of power by the Central Board – (1) The Central Board may, by a 
resolution, empower its Chairman or the Commissioner or both, to sanction expenditure, subject 
to such limits as may be specified in the resolution, on contingencies, supplies and purchases of 
articles required for administering the Insurance Fund subject to financial provision in the budget, 
where such expenditure is beyond the limits upto which the Chairman or the Commissioner is 
authorized to sanction expenditure on any single item. 
 
(2) The Central Board may also by a resolution empower its Chairman or the Commissioner 
or both, to appoint such officers and employees other than those mentioned in sub-sections (2) 

2 | P a g e  
 
and (3) of section 5D of the Act, as the Chairman or the Commissioner may consider necessary 
for the efficient administration of this Scheme. 
 
(3) All sanctions of expenditure made by the Chairman or Commissioner in pursuance of 
sub-paragraph (1) shall be reported to the Central Board as soon as possible after the sanction of 
the expenditure. 
  
6. Administrative and financial powers of the Commissioner. – The Commissioner 
may, without reference to the Central Board, sanction expenditure on contingencies, supplies and 
services and purchase of articles required for administering the Insurance Fund, subject to financial 
provision in the budget and subject to the limits upto which he may be authorized to sanction 
expenditure on any single item from time to time by the Central Board. 
 
7. Contribution. – (1) The contribution payable by the employer and the Central 
Government under sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of section 6C of the Act, shall be calculated 
on the basis of the basic wages, dearness allowance (including the cash value of any food 
concession) and retaining allowance, if any, actually drawn during the whole month whether paid 
on daily, weekly, fortnightly or monthly basis: 
 
[Provided that where the monthly pay of an employee exceeds fifteen thousand rupees, 
the contribution payable in respect of him by the employer and the Central Government shall be 
limited to the amounts payable on a monthly pay of fifteen thousand rupees including dearness 
allowance, retaining allowance if any and cash value of food concession.] 
 
(2) Each contribution shall be calculated to the nearest rupee, 50 paise or more to be 
counted as the next higher rupee and fraction of a rupee less than 50 paise to be ignored. 
 
8. Mode of payment of contribution. – (1) The contribution by the employer shall be 
remitted by him together with administrative charges at such rate as the Central Government may 
fix from time to time under sub-section (4) of Section 6C of the Act, to the Insurance Fund within 
fifteen days of the close of every month by a separate bank draft or cheque or by remittance in 
cash in such manner as may be specified in this behalf by the Commissioner. The cost of 
remittance if any, shall be borne by the employer. 
 
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the employer to pay the contribution payable by himself 
in respect of the employees directly employed by him and also in respect of the employees 
employed by or through a contractor. 
 
(3) The Central Government shall credit its contribution to the Insurance Fund as soon as 
possible after the close of every financial year. 
 
(4) The Commissioner shall deposit the bank draft or cheque received from the employers 
in the State Bank of India or any Bank specified in the First Schedule to the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970). 
 
8-A. Recovery of damages for default in payment of any contribution: - (1) Where an 
employer makes default in the payment of any contribution to the Insurance Fund, or in the 
payment of any charges payable under any other provisions of the Act or the Scheme, the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner or such officer as may be authorised by the Central Government 
by notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf, may recover damages from the employer at the 
rate of one per cent. of the arrear of contribution per month or part thereof. 
 
(2) The damages shall be calculated to the nearest rupee, 50 paise or more to be counted 
as the nearest higher rupee and fraction of a rupee less than 50 paise to be ignored. 
 
8-B. Terms and conditions for reduction or waiver of damages. – The Central Board 
may reduce or waive the damages levied under section 14B of the Act in relation to an 
establishment specified in the second proviso to section 14B, subject to the following terms and 
conditions, namely: - 

3 | P a g e  
 
 
(a) in case of a change of management including transfer of the undertaking to workers’  
co-operative and in case of merger or amalgamation of the sick industrial company with any other 
industrial company, complete waiver of damages may be allowed; 
 
(b) in cases, where the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction, for reasons to 
be recorded in its scheme, in this behalf recommends, waiver of damages upto 100 per cent may 
be allowed; 
 
(c) in other cases, depending on merits, reduction of damages upto 50 per cent may be 
allowed. 
 
9. Employer’s contribution not to be deducted from the wages of the employees. –  
Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary, the employer shall not be entitled to deduct the 
employer’s contribution payable by him under this Scheme from the wages of the employees or to 
recover it from them in any other manner. 
 
10. Duties of employers. – (1) Every employer shall send to the Commissioner, within 
fifteen days of the commencement of the Scheme, a consolidated return in such form as he may 
specify, of the employees who are entitled and required to become members of the Insurance 
Scheme showing inter-alia, the Insurance Scheme Number, name, accumulations in the Insurance 
Scheme as at the end of the financial or accounting year preceding the date on which this Scheme 
comes into force together with certified copies of nomination executed by each employee under 
the rules of the Provident Fund of the establishment. 
 
(1A) Every employer shall send to the Commissioner within fifteen days of the close of 
each month, a return in Form 5 of the Employees’ Provident Fund Scheme of the employees, 
 
(a) qualifying to become members of the Insurance Fund, for the first time during 
the preceding month together with the certified copies of nomination made by each 
such qualifying employee, and 
 
(b) leaving service of the employer during the preceding month 
 
Provided that if there is no employee qualifying to become a member of the Insurance 
Fund for the first time or there is no employee leaving the service of the employer, during the 
preceding month, the employer shall send a ‘NIL’ return. 
 
(1B) Every employer shall send to the Commissioner, within twenty-five days of the close 
of the month, in such form as he may specify, a monthly abstract showing, inter-alia, the aggregate 
amount of wages of all the members on which contributions are payable and the employers 
contribution in respect of all such members for the month. 
 
(2) Every employer shall maintain such accounts in relation to the amounts contributed to 
the Insurance Fund by him as the Central Board may, from time to time, direct, and it shall be the 
duty of every employer to assist the Central Board in making such payment from the Insurance 
Fund as are sanctioned by or under the authority of the Central Board. 
 
3) Every employer shall send to the Commissioner, an electronic format of the return 
referred to in sub-paragraph (1), (1A) & (1B), in such form and manner as may be specified by the 
Commissioner. 
 
11. Inspection of records and registers by the Commissioner or Inspector. – Every 
employer shall, whenever the Commissioner or any other officer authorized by him in this behalf 
or an inspector so requires, produce before him the records and other registers then in his 
possession, for inspection. 
 
12. Supply of forms to employers. – The Commissioner shall supply to employers free 
of charge, on demand, forms referred to in this Scheme to the extent absolutely necessary. 

4 | P a g e  
 
 
13. Administration Account – The contributions received from the employers and the 
Central Government under sub-section (4) of section 6C of the Act shall be credited to a separate 
account called “The Insurance Fund Central Administration Account” and all expenses in 
connection with the administration of this Scheme, other than the cost of benefits provided by or 
under this Scheme, shall be met out of this account. 
 
14. Deposit-Linked Insurance Fund Account. – The amount received as the employer’s 
contribution and also the Central Government’s contribution to the Insurance Fund under sub-
section (2) and (3) of section 6C shall be credited to an account called the “Deposit-Linked 
Insurance Fund Account”, and all expenses towards the cost of any benefits provided by or under 
the Scheme shall be met out of this account. 
 
15. Investment of moneys belonging to the Insurance Fund. – 1) All moneys standing 
to the credit of the Insurance Fund as on 31st March, 1997 shall be kept in deposit with the Central 
Government in the Public Account, and the Central Government shall allow interest at a rate not 
less than 8-1/2 per cent per annum. 
 
(2) The moneys credited as contributions to the Insurance Fund on and from the 1st day 
of April, 1997 shall be invested as per the investment pattern notified under paragraph 52 of the 
Employees’ Provident Funds Scheme, 1952. 
 
16. Interest. – All interest, rent and other income realized and net profits or losses, if any, 
from the sale of investments, not including therein the transaction of Insurance Fund Central 
Administration Account, shall be credited or debited as the case may be to the Insurance Fund. 
 
17. Disposal of the Insurance Fund. – (1) Subject to the provisions of the Act and of this 
Scheme, the Insurance Fund, not including therein the Insurance Fund Central administration 
Account, shall not, except with the previous sanction of the Central Board, be 
expended for any purpose other than the payment of the benefits in accordance with the provisions 
of this Scheme.  
 
(2) The Insurance Fund shall be operated upon by such officers as may be authorized in 
this behalf by the Central Board. 
 
18. Expenses of Administration. – All expenses relating to the administration of this 
Scheme including the expenses incurred on Regional Committee shall be met from the “Insurance 
Fund Central Administration Account”. 
 
19. Forms of accounts. – The accounts of the Employees’ Deposit Linked Insurance Fund 
and also the Employees’ Deposit Linked Insurance Administration Account shall be maintained by 
the Commissioner in such form and in such manner as may be specified by the Central Board with 
the approval of Central Government. 
 
20. Audit. – (1) The accounts of the Insurance Fund, including the Insurance Fund Central 
Administration Account, shall be audited in accordance with the instructions issued by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
(2) The charges on account of audit shall be paid out of the Insurance Fund Central 
Administration Account. 
 
21. Budget. – (1) The Commissioner shall place before the Central Board each year before 
the first fortnight of February a budget showing separately the probable receipts from the 
contributions and from the levy of administrative charges and the expenditure which is proposed 
to be incurred during the following financial year. The budget as approved by the Central Board 
shall be submitted for sanction to the Central Government within a month of its being placed before 
the Central Board. 
 

5 | P a g e  
 
(2) The Central Government may make such modification the budget as it considers 
desirable before sanctioning it. 
 
(3) The Commissioner may at any time during the year, make budgetary reappropriation 
of funds sanctioned in the budget, by the Central Government provided that, 
 
(i) the total amount sanctioned in the budget by the Central Government is not 
exceeded; 
 
(ii) it is made only for meeting such expenses of administration as are to be met 
from the Insurance Fund Central Administration Account in accordance with 
paragraph 18; and 
 
(iii) every reappropriation so made shall be reported by him to the Central Board at 
its next meeting. 
 
(4) The Commissioner shall place before the Central Board a supplementary budget for a 
financial year, giving detailed estimates and reasons of inescapable expenditure which is likely to 
be incurred during the year for which no provision has been made in the sanctioned budget and 
which cannot be covered under the provisions of sub-paragraph (3). The supplementary budget 
as approved by the Central Board shall be submitted for sanction to the Central Government within 
a month of its being placed before the Central Board. 
 
(5) Any expenditure incurred by the Commissioner over and above the sanctioned budget 
of the financial year and not covered under the provisions of sub-paragraphs (3) and (4), shall be 
reported to the Central Board at the earliest practicable moment after the excess is established for 
its consideration and for obtaining sanction of the Central Government. 
 
22. Scales of assurance benefit and the minimum average balance to be maintained 
by an employee. – (1) On the death of an employee, who is a member of the Fund or of a provident 
fund exempted under section 17 of the Act, as the case may be, the persons entitled to receive 
the provident fund accumulations of the deceased shall, in addition to such accumulations be paid 
an amount, equal to the average balance in the account of the deceased in the Fund or of a 
Provident Fund exempted under Section 17 of the Act, as the case may be, during preceding 
twelve months or during the period of his membership, whichever is less, except where the average 
balance exceeds rupees fifty thousand, the amount payable shall be rupees fifty thousand plus 
40% of the amount in excess of rupees fifty thousand subject to a ceiling of rupees one lakh. 
 
[(1A) In the event of death of an employee under sub-paragraph (1) during the preceding 
twelve months or during the period of his membership, even if the average provident fund balance 
of an employee who is a member of the Fund or of a provident fund exempted under section 17 of 
the Act, as the case may be, is less than rupees fifty thousand, a minimum assurance benefit of 
rupees fifty thousand shall be payable.] 
 
Explanation 1. – For the purpose of determining the average balance in the Fund or in the 
provident fund exempted under section 17 of the Act, as the case may be, in relation to any 
employee, the sum total of contributions by the employee and the employer, due for and 
upto the relevant period, whether paid or unpaid in the Fund or in the provident fund exempted 
under section 17 of the Act, as the case may be, together with interest thereon, shall be included. 
 
Explanation 2. – The period of twelve months for calculation of benefits under this Scheme 
shall be computed backwards from the month preceding the month in which death of the member 
occurs. 
 
(2) In the case of a part-time employee who was a member of the Fund or of a provident 
fund exempted under section 17 of the Act, as the case may be, while serving in more than one 
factory or establishment the quantum of benefit under this Scheme shall be determined with 
reference to the average of the aggregate balance in all his accounts in the Fund or of a provident 

6 | P a g e  
 
fund exempted under section 17 of the Act, as the case may be, during the preceding twelve 
months. 
 
(3) On the death of an employee, who is a member of the Fund or of a provident fund 
exempted under Section 17 of the Act, as the case may be, and was in employment for a 
continuous period of twelve months, preceding the month in which he died, the persons entitled to 
receive the provident fund accumulations of the deceased shall, in addition to such accumulations 
to be paid an amount, equal to:- 
 
[ (i) the average monthly wages drawn (subject to a maximum of fifteen thousand rupees), 
during the twelve months preceding the month in which he died, multiplied by [thirty-five 
times] plus fifty per cent. of the average balance in the account of the deceased in the fund 
or of a provident fund exempted under section 17 of the Act or under paragraph 27 or 27A 
of the Employees' Provident Funds Scheme, 1952, as the case may be, during the 
preceding twelve months subject to a ceiling of one lakh and seventy-five thousand 
rupees]: 
 
Provided that the assurance benefit shall not be less than two lakh and fifty thousand 
rupees: 
 
Provided further that the assurance benefit shall not exceed seven lakh rupees;] 
 
 
(ii) the amount of benefit under sub-paragraph (1), 
 
whichever is higher. 
 
[Provided that for the purpose of determination of continuous period of twelve months 
required for eligibility of minimum assurance benefits payable under sub-paragraph (3) of the 
Scheme, the gap of upto sixty days between two spells of employment shall be ignored and such 
multiple services shall be added being treated as continuous service.] 
 
Explanation.- In the case of a part-time employee who is a member of the Fund or of a 
provident fund under section 17 of the Act, as the case may be, who was serving in more than one 
factory or establishment for a continuous period of twelve months, preceding the month in which 
he died, the quantum of benefit under this Scheme shall be determined with reference to the 
average wages of the aggregate of all the wages wherever he was continuously working for more 
than twelve months, subject to the wage ceiling of '[fifteen thousand rupees].]. 
 
[(4) The benefit under this Scheme shall be further increased by twenty per cent. in addition 
to the benefits admissible under [sub-paragraph (1) or (2)] of paragraph 22, as the case may be.] 
 
[(5) In the event an employee who is a member of the Fund or of a provident fund exempted 
under section 17 of the Act, as the case may be, dies in service within six months of the last 
contribution received while still being on the rolls of the employer, such an employee shall get the 
assurance benefit as per the Scheme.] 
 
23. Assurance benefit to whom payable. – (1) The nomination made by an employee 
under Employees’ Provident Funds Scheme,1952, or under the provident fund exempted under 
section 17 of the Act, as the case may be, shall be treated as nominations under this 
Scheme and the assurance amount shall become payable to such nominee or nominees. 
 
(2) If no nomination subsists or if the nomination relates only to part of the amount standing 
to his credit in the Fund or of a provident fund exempted under section 17 of the Act, as the case 
may be, the whole amount or the part thereof to which the nomination does not relate, as the case 
may be, shall become payable to the members of his family in equal shares: 
 
Provided that no share shall be payable to – 
 
(a) sons who have attained majority; 

7 | P a g e  
 
(b) sons of a deceased son who have attained majority; 
(c) married daughters whose husbands are alive; 
(d) married daughters of a deceased son whose husbands are alive; 
 
if there is any member of the family other than those specified in clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d): 
 
Provided further that the widow or widows, and the child or children of a deceased son 
shall receive between them in equal parts only the share which that son would have received if he 
had survived the employee and had not attained the age of majority at the time of his death. 
 
(3) In any case to which the provisions of sub-paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply the whole 
amount shall be payable to the person legally entitled to it. 
 
(4) If a person who is eligible to receive assurance Scheme benefit of the deceased 
member in terms of sub-paragraph 1,2 or 3 is charged with the offence of murdering the member 
or for abetting in the commission of such an offence, his claim to receive assurance benefit shall 
remain suspended till the conclusion of the criminal proceedings instituted against him. If on the 
conclusion of the criminal proceedings, the person concerned is : - 
 
(a) convicted for the murder or abetting the murder of the member, he shall be debarred 
from receiving his share of deposit linked assurance benefit which shall be payable to other 
eligible members of any of the family; or 
 
(b) acquitted of the charge of murdering or abetting in the murder of the member, his share 
shall be payable to him. 
 
Explanation. – For the purpose of this paragraph an employee’s posthumous child, if born 
alive, shall be treated in the same way as a surviving child born before his death. 
 
24. Assurance amount – how to be paid. – (1) The nominee or nominees or other 
claimants shall send a written application to the Commissioner through the employer in such form 
as the Commissioner may specify, to claim payment under this Scheme. 
 
(2) If the person to whom any amount is to be paid under this Scheme is a minor or a 
lunatic, the payment shall be made in accordance with the provisions in the Employees’ Provident 
Funds Scheme, 1952 relating to payment to such persons. 
 
(3) The payment may be made, at the option of the person to whom payment is to be made 
through electronic or digital funds transfer system in any Scheduled Commercial Bank or any post 
office. 
 
(4) The claims, complete in all respects submitted along with the requisite documents shall 
be settled and benefit amount paid to the beneficiaries within twenty days from the date of its 
receipt by the Commissioner. If there is any deficiency in the claim, the same shall be 
recorded in writing and communicated to the applicant within twenty days from the date of receipt 
of such application. In case the Commissioner fails without sufficient cause to settle a claim 
complete in all respect within twenty days, the Commissioner shall be liable for the delay beyond 
the set period and penal interest 12% per annum may be charged on the benefit amount and the 
same may be deducted from the salary of the Commissioner. 
 
25. Registers, Records etc. – The Commissioner may with the approval of the Central 
Board specify the registers and records to be maintained in respect of the employees, the form or 
design of any identity card, token or disc for the purpose of identifying any employee or his nominee 
or nominees or a member of his family entitled to receive the benefit under this Scheme and such 
other formalities as have to be completed in connection with the payment of the said benefit, 
subject to such periodical verification as may be considered necessary. 
 

8 | P a g e  
 
26. Annual Report on the working of this scheme. – The Central Board shall approve 
before the 10th of December and submit to the Central Government before the 20th of December 
each year, a report on the working of this Scheme during the previous financial year. 
 
[27. Power to issue directions -   ***] 
 
28. Special provisions relating to establishments in respect of which applications 
are received for exemption from the provisions of this Scheme. – (1) (i) A Commissioner may 
be order and subject to such conditions as may be specified in this order exempt from the operation 
of all or any of the provisions of this Scheme an employee to whom this Scheme applies on receipt 
of application from such an employee: 
 
Provided that such an employee is without making any separate contribution or payment 
of premium, in enjoyment of benefits in the nature of life assurance, whether linked to their deposits 
in provident funds or not, according to the rules of the factory or other establishment and such 
benefits are more favourable than the benefits provided under this Scheme. 
 
(ii) Where an employee is exempted, as aforesaid, the employer shall in respect of such 
employee maintain such accounts, submit such returns, provide such facilities for inspection as 
the Commissioner may direct and pay such inspection charges and make such 
investments as the Central Government may direct. 
 
(2) An employee exempted under sub-paragraph 1 may, by an application to the 
Commissioner, make a request that the benefits of this Scheme be extended to him. 
 
(3) No employee shall be granted exemption or permitted to apply out of exemption more 
than once on each account. 
 
(4) (i) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Additional Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner (Head Quarters) or Additional Central Provident Fund Commissioner may by order 
and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order exempt from the operation of all or 
any of the provisions of this Scheme any class of employees to whom this Scheme applies, on 
receipt of an application therefore, in such form as the Commissioner may specify: 
 
Provided that such class of employees is, without making any separate contribution on 
payment of premium, in enjoyment of benefits in the nature of life assurance, whether linked to 
their deposits in provident fund or not, according to the rules of the factory or other establishment 
and such benefits are more favourable than the benefits provided under this Scheme. 
 
(ii) Where any class of employees is exempted as aforesaid, the employer shall in respect 
of such class of employees maintain such accounts, submit such returns, provide such facilities 
for inspection, pay such inspection charges and make investments in such manner as the Central 
Government may direct. 
 
(5) A class of employees exempted under sub-paragraph 4 or the majority of employees 
constituting such class may, by an application to the Commissioner, make a request that the 
benefits of this Scheme be extended to them. 
 
(6) No class of employees or the majority of employees constituting such class shall be 
granted exemption or permitted to apply out of exemption more than once on each account. 
 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Scheme the Commissioner may in relation 
to a factory or other establishment in respect of which an application for exemption under section 
17 (2A) of the Act has been received, relax pending the disposal of the application, the provisions 
of this Scheme in such manner as he may direct. 
 
(8) Every employer shall send to the Commissioner, an electronic format of the returns 
referred to in clause (ii) of sub-paragraph (1) and clause (ii) of sub-paragraph (4), in such form and 
manner as may be specified by the Commissioner. 

9 | P a g e  
 
 
[28-A.  Special provision in respect of Employees' Enrolment Campaign,  2017. – The 
exceptions and modifications subject to which the provisions of this Scheme shall apply, in relation 
to the employees whose membership have been declared under paragraph 82A of the Employees' 
Provident Funds Scheme, 1952, in accordance with the Employees' Enrolment Campaign, 2017, 
shall be as follows, namely: - 
 
In paragraph 8A, in sub-paragraph (1), for the Table, the following Table shall be 
substituted, namely: - 
 
“TABLE” 
 
(Applicable for remittances in respect of valid declarations under Employees’ Enrolment 
Campaign, 2017) 
 
Period of default 
(1) 
Rate of damages  
(2) 
Between the 1st day of April, 2009 to the 31st 
day of December, 2016  
One rupee per annum”] 
 
 
29. Punishment for failure to submit returns etc. – If any person, - 
 
(a) deducts or attempts to deduct from the wages or other remuneration of a 
member the whole or any part of the employer’s contribution, or, 
 
(b) fails or refuses to submit any return, statement or other documents required by 
this Scheme or submits a false return, statement or other documents, or makes a false 
declaration, or 
 
(c) obstructs any Inspector or other official appointed under the Act or this Scheme 
in the discharge of his duties or fails to produce any record for inspection by such Inspector 
or other official, or 
 
(d) is guilty of contravention of or non-compliance with any other requirements of 
this Scheme, 
 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine which 
may extend to [twenty-five thousand rupees], or with both. 
 
******

[FORMS_REFERENCED]
None

[RELATED_QUERIES]
None
---
