---
SOURCE: local_offline_pdf
DOMAIN: epfo
CATEGORY: rules
LAST_UPDATED: 2026-03-09
LANGUAGE: English
---

[Employees' Pension Scheme, 1995]

[CONTENT]
23-12-2024 15:50 
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 6A of the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952), the Central Government hereby makes the following Scheme, namely: - 
 
1. Short title, commencement and application. - (1) This Scheme may be called the Employees' 
Pension Scheme, 1995. 
(2) (a) This Scheme shall come into force on 16th day of November, 1995; 
      (b) Subject to the provisions of this Scheme the employees have an option to become the 
members of the Scheme with effect from the l st April, 1993. 
(3) 
Subject to the provisions of Section 16 of the-Employees' Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, this Scheme shall apply to the employees of all 
factories and other establishments to which the Employees' Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 applies or is applied under sub-section (3) or sub- 
section (4) of Section l or Section 3 thereof. 
 
2. Definitions. - ( l ) In this Scheme unless the context otherwise requires : - 
(i) 
" Act " means the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 
of 1952). 
(ii) 
" actual service " means the aggregate of period of service rendered from the 16th 
November, 1995 or from the date of joining any establishment whichever is later to the date 
of exit from the employment of the establishment covered under the Act; 
(iii) 
" Commissioner " means a Commissioner for Employees' Provident Funds appointed under 
Section 5D of the Act; 
(iv) 
" contributory service " means the period of ' actual service ' rendered by a member for 
which the contributions to the fund have been received or are receivable; 
(v) 
" eligible member " means an employee who is eligible to join the " Employees' Pension 
Scheme"; 
(vi) 
" Existing Member " means an existing employee who is a "Member of the Employees' 
Family Pension Scheme, 1971 " 
(vii) 
" Family " means – 
(i) wife in the case of male member of the Employees' Pension Fund; 
(ii) husband in the case of a female member of the Employees' Pension Fund; and 
(iii) sons and daughters of a member of the Employees' Pension Fund; 
Explanation- The expression " sons " and " daughters " shall include children legally adopted by the 
member. 
 
(viii) " Pension " means 'the pension payable under the Employees' Pension Scheme and also 
includes the family pension admissible and payable under the Employees' Family Pension 
Scheme, 1971 immediately preceding the commencement of the Employees' Pension Scheme, 
1995 with effect from the 16th November, 1995; 
(ix) 
" Member " means an employee who becomes a; member of the Employees' Pension Fund in' 
accordance with the provisions of this Scheme. 
 
Explanation. - An employee shall cease to be the member of Pension Fund from the date of attaining 
58 years of age or from the date of vesting admissible benefits under the Scheme, whichever is 
earlier. 
 
(x) 
" Non-Contributory Service " is the period of " actual service " rendered by a member for which 
no contribution to the " Employees' Pension fund " has been received or are receivable; 
 
(xi) 
" orphan " means a person, none of whose parents is alive; 
 
(xii) 
" past service " means the period of service rendered by an existing member from the date of 
joining Employees' Family Pension Fund till the 15th November, 1995; 
 
(xiii) " Pay " means basic wages, with dearness allowance, retaining allowance and cash value of food 
concessions admissible, if any; 
 
(xiv) "Pension Fund '' means the Employees' Pension Fund set up under sub-section (2) of Section 6A 
of the Act; 
(xv) 
" pensionable service " means the service rendered by the member for which contributions have 
been received or are receivable; 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
(xvi) " Permanent total disablement " means such disablement of permanent nature as incapacitates an 
employee for all work which he/she was capable of performing at the time of disablement, 
regardless whether such disablement is sustained in the course of employment or otherwise; 
 
(xvii) " Table " means Table appended to this Scheme; 
 
(xviii) The words and expressions defined in the Act but not defined in this Scheme shall have the same 
meaning as assigned to them in the Act. 
 
3. Employees' Pension Fund. - (1) From and out of the contributions payable by the employer in each 
month under Section 6 of the Act or under the rules of the Provident Fund of the establishment 
which is exempted either under clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 17 of the Act or 
whose employees are exempted under either paragraph 27 or paragraph 27-A of the Employees' 
Provident Fund Scheme, 1952, a part of contribution representing 8.33 per cent. of the 
Employee's pay shall be remitted by the employer to the Employees' Pension Fund within 15 
days of the close of every month by a separate bank draft or cheque on account of the Employees' 
Pension Fund contribution in such manner as may be specified in this behalf by the 
Commissioner. The cost of the remittance, if any, shall be borne by the employer. 
(2) 
The Central Government shall also contribute at the rate of 1.16 per cent. of the pay of the 
members of the Employees' Pension Scheme and credit the contribution to the Employees' 
Pension Fund : 
 
Provided that where the pay of the member exceeds fifteen thousand rupees per month the 
contribution payable by the employer and the Central Government be limited to the amount 
payable on his pay of fifteen thousand rupees only. 
 
(3) 
Each contribution payable under sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) shall be calculated to the nearest 
rupee, fifty paise or more to be counted as the next higher rupee and fraction of a rupee less than 
fifty paise to be ignored. 
 
(4) 
The net assets of the Family Pension Scheme, 1971 shall vest in and stand transferred to the 
Employees' Pension Fund. 
 
4. Payment of contribution. - (1) The employer shall pay the contribution payable to the Employees' 
Pension Fund in respect of each member of the Employees' Pension Fund employed by him 
directly or by or through a contractor. 
 
(2) 
It shall be the responsibility of the principal employer to pay the contributions payable to the 
Employees' Pension Fund by himself in respect of the employees directly employed by him and 
also in respect of the employees employed by or through a contractor. 
 
Provided that the Central Government shall pay the contribution payable to the Employees' 
Pension Fund in respect of an employee who is a person with disability under the Persons with 
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of 
1996) and under the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental 
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999 (44 of 1999) respectively, upto a maximum of 
three years from the date of commencement of membership of the Fund. 
 
5. Recovery of damages for default in payment of any contributions. - (1) Where an employer makes 
default in the payment of any contribution to the Employees’ Pension Fund, or in the payment of 
any charges payable under any other provisions of the Act or the Scheme, the Central Provident 
Fund Commissioner or such officer as may be authorised by the Central Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf, may recover damages from the employer at the 
rate of one per cent. of the arrear of contribution per month or part thereof. 
 
(2)  The damages shall be calculated to the nearest rupee, 50 paise or more to be counted as the 
nearest higher rupee and fraction of a rupee less than 50 paise to be ignored. 
 
 [Inserted vide G.S.R 327 (E) dated 14.06.2024 w.e.f. 14.06.2024] 
 
6. Membership of the Employees' Pension Scheme. - Subject to sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 1, the 
Scheme shall apply to every employee – 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
(a) 
who on or after the 16th November, 1995, becomes a member of the Employees' Provident Fund 
Scheme, 1952, or of the Provident Funds of the factories and other establishments exempted by 
the appropriate Government under section 17 of the Act, or in whose case exemption has been 
granted under paragraph 27 or 27-A of the Employees' Provident Fund Scheme, 1952 and whose 
pay on such date is less than or equal to fifteen thousand rupees, from the date of such 
membership; 
(b) 
who has been a member of the ceased Employees' Family Pension Scheme, 1971 before the 
commencement of this Scheme from 16th November, 1995; 
(c) 
who ceased to be a member of the Employees' Family Pension Scheme, 1971 between 1st April, 
1993 and 15th November, 1995 and opts to exercise his option under Paragraph 7; 
(d) 
who has been a member of the Employees' Provident Fund or of Provident Funds of factories 
and other establishments exempted by the appropriate Government under section 17 of the Act 
or in whose case exemption has been granted under Paragraph 27 or 27 A of the Employees' 
Provident Fund Scheme, 1952, on 15th November, 1995 but not being a member of the ceased 
Employees' Family Pension Scheme, 1971 opts to exercise his option under paragraph 7. 
Explanation.- An employee shall cease to be the member of Pension Fund from the date of attaining 58 
years of age or from the date of vesting admissible benefits under the Scheme, whichever is 
earlier. 
6A. Retention of membership. - A member of the Employees' Pension Fund shall continue to be such 
member till he attains the age of 58 years or he avails the withdrawal benefit to which he is 
entitled under para 14 of the Scheme, or dies, or the pension is vested in him in terms of para 12 
of the Scheme whichever is earlier. 
7. Option for joining the Scheme. - (1) Members referred to under sub-para (c) of Paragraph 6 who 
have died between 1st April, 1993 and 15th November, 1995 shall be deemed to have exercised 
the option of joining the Scheme on the date of his death. 
(2) 
Members referred to in sub-paragraph (c) of paragraph 6 who are alive shall have the 
option to join the Scheme as per the provisions of paragraph 17 from the date of exit from the 
employment. 
(3) 
Members referred to in sub-paragraph (d) of paragraph 6 shall have the option to join the 
Scheme as per the provisions of Paragraph 17 from 16th November, 1995. 
8. Resolution of doubts. – If any doubt arises whether an employee is entitled to become a member of 
the Employees' Pension Fund, the same shall be referred to the Regional Provident Fund 
Commissioner who shall decide the same: 
Provided that both the employer and the employee shall be heard before passing final order in 
the matter. 
9. Determination of eligible service. –  The eligible service shall be determined as follows:  
 
(a) 
In the case of "new entrant" the "contributory service" shall be treated as eligible service. The 
total contributory service shall be rounded off to the nearest year. The fraction of service for six 
months or more shall be treated as one year and the service less than six months shall be ignored. 
Explanation. - In the case of employees employed seasonally any establishment the period of 
"contributory service'' in any year, notwithstanding that such service is less than a year shall be 
treated as a full year. 
(b) 
In the case of the "existing member" the aggregate of contributory service and the 'past service' 
shall be treated as eligible service. 
Provided that if there is any period in the "past service" for which the contributions towards the 
Family Pension Scheme, 1971 has not been received, the said period shall count as eligible 
service only if the contributions thereof have been received in the Employees' Pension Fund. 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
Explanation. - For the purpose of this sub-paragraph, the aggregate of contributory service and past 
service for less than six months shall be ignored and six months and above shall be rounded to a 
year. 
10. Determination of Pensionable Service. - (1) The pensionable service of the member shall be 
determined with reference to the contributions received or are receivable on his behalf in the 
Employees' Pension Fund. 
(2)  In the case of the member who superannuates on attaining the age of 58 years, and who has 
rendered 20 years pensionable service or more, his pensionable service shall be increased by 
adding a weightage of 2 years. 
11. Determination of Pensionable Salary. - (1) The pensionable salary shall be the average monthly 
pay drawn in any manner including on piece rate basis during contributory period of service in 
the span of sixty months preceding the date of exit from the membership of the Pension Fund 
and the pensionable salary shall be determined on pro-rata ·basis for the pensionable service up 
to the 1st day of September, 2014, subject to a maximum of six thousand and five hundred rupees 
per month, and for the period thereafter at the maximum of fifteen thousand rupees per month : 
Provided that if a member was not in receipt of full pay during the period of sixty months 
preceding the day, he ceased to be the member of the Pension Fund, the average of previous sixty 
months full pay drawn by him during the period for which contribution to the pension fund was 
recovered, shall be considered as pensionable salary for calculating pension. 
(2) 
If during the said span of 60 months there are non-contributory periods of service including cases 
where the member has drawn salary for a part of the month, the total wages during the 60 months 
span shall be divided by the actual number of days for which salary has been drawn and the 
amount so derived shall be multiplied by 30 to work out the average monthly pay. 
(3) 
The maximum pensionable salary shall be limited to fifteen thousand rupees per month. 
 
(4) 
The existing members as on the 1st day of September, 2014, who at the option of the employer 
and employee, had been contributing on salary exceeding six thousand and five hundred rupees 
per month, may on a fresh option to be exercised jointly by the employer and employee continue 
to contribute on salary exceeding fifteen thousand rupees per month and the pensionable salary 
for the existing members who prefer such fresh option shall be based on the higher salary: 
Provided that the aforesaid members have to contribute at the rate of 1.16 per cent. [***] on 
salary exceeding fifteen thousand rupees as an additional contribution from and out of the 
contributions payable by the employees for each month under the provisions of the Act or the 
rules made thereunder: 
Provided further that the fresh option shall be exercised by the member within a period of six 
months from the 1st day of September, 2014: 
 
Provided also that the period specified in the second proviso may, on sufficient cause being 
shown by the member, be extended by the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner for a further 
period not exceeding six months: 
Provided also if no option is exercised by the member within such period (including the extended 
period), it shall be deemed that the member has not opted for contribution over wage ceiling and 
the contributions to the Pension Fund made over the wage ceiling in respect of the member shall 
be diverted to the Provident Fund account of the member along with interest as declared under 
the Employees' Provident Funds Scheme from time to time. 
 
[*** Whereas the Hon’ble Supreme Court had vide its Judgment, dated the 4th November, 2022, 
in Civil Appeal No. 8143-8144 of 2022 [SLP(C) Nos. 8658-8659 of 2019] in the matter of the 
Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation and others versus Sunil Kumar B. and others, along with 
other tagged matters, held the requirement of the members to contribute at the rate of 1.16 per cent. 
of their salary to the extent such salary exceeds fifteen thousand rupees per month as an additional 
contribution under the provisions of sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 11 of the Employees’ Pension 
Scheme, 1995 to be ultra vires the provisions of the Employees’ Provident Funds and 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952); 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 16 
of the Code on Social Security, 2020 (36 of 2020), the Central Government hereby notifies the 
following, namely: - 
 
(i) In respect of members who have exercised joint option for contributing under the provisions of 
paragraph 11 of the Employees’ Pension Scheme, 1995 and who are found eligible, the employer’s 
contribution shall be nine and forty-ninth per cent. (9.49%) of the basic wages, dearness allowance 
and retaining allowance of each member by increasing one and sixteenth per cent. (1.16%) from 
the extant eight and one-third per cent. (8.33%); and 
 
(ii) the increased contribution shall be applicable to basic wages, dearness allowance and retaining 
allowance to the extent such basic wages, dearness allowance and retaining allowance exceed 
fifteen thousand rupees per month. 
 
 [Notified vide S.O. 2061(E).dated 03.05.2023 w.e.f. 1st day of September, 2014.]] 
12. Monthly Member's Pension. - (1) A member shall be entitled to: - 
 
(a) 
superannuation pension if he has rendered eligible service of 10 years or more and retires on 
attaining the age of 58 years; 
(b) 
early pension, if he has rendered eligible service of 10 years or more and retires or otherwise 
ceases to be in the employment before attaining the age of 58 years. 
(2) 
In the case of a new entrant, the amount of monthly superannuation pension or early pension, as 
the case may be, shall be computed in accordance with the following factors, namely: - 
Monthly member's pension = Pensionable salary X Pensionable service 
70 
 
Provided that the members' monthly pension shall be determined on a pro-rata basis for the 
pensionable service upto the 1st day of September, 2014 at the maximum pensionable salary of 
six thousand and five hundred rupees per month and for the period thereafter at the maximum 
pensionable salary of fifteen thousand rupees per month. 
(3) 
In the case of an existing member in respect of whom the date of commencement of pension is 
after the 16th November, 2005, - 
(i) 
superannuation or early pension shall be equal to the aggregate of: - 
(a) 
pension as determined under sub-paragraph (2) for the period of pensionable service rendered 
from the 16th November, 1995 or Rs. 635/- per month whichever is more; 
(b) 
past service pension shall be as given below: - 
The past service pension payable on completion of 58 years of age on the 16th November, 1995 
 
 
Years of past service 
Salary upto Rs 2500/- per month 
Salary more than Rs 2500/- per month 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
(i) 
Upto 11 years 
 
80 
 
85 
(ii)
More than 11 years but upto 15 years           
          95 
       
       105 
(iii) More than 15 years but less than 20 years
 
120
 
135
(iv) Beyond 20 years 
 
150 
 
170 
 
The amount under column (2) or (3) above, as the case may be, shall be multiplied by the factor 
given in Table ' B ' corresponding to the period between the 16th November, 1995 and the date 
of exit to arrive at past service pension payable. 
(ii) 
The aggregate of (a) and (b) calculated as above shall be subject to a minimum of Rs. 800/- per 
month, provided the eligible service is 24 years. Provided further, if it is less than 24 years, the 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
pension as computed above shall be reduced proportionately subject to a minimum of Rs. 450/- 
per month. 
(4) 
 In the case of an existing member and in respect of whom the date of commencement of pension 
is between the 16th November, 2000 and the 16th November, 2005, - 
(i) 
superannuation or early pension shall be equal to the aggregate of: - 
(a) 
pension as determined under sub-paragraph (2) for the period of service rendered from the 16th 
November, 1995 or Rs. 438/- per month whichever is more; 
(b) 
past service pension as provided in sub-paragraph (3). 
(ii) 
The aggregate of (a) and (b) calculated as above shall be subject to a minimum of Rs. 600/- per 
month, provided the eligible service is 24 years. Provided further, if it is less than 24 years, the 
pension shall be proportionately less subject to the minimum of Rs. 325/- per month. 
(5) 
In the case of an existing member and in respect of whom the date of commencement of pension 
is before the 16th November, 2000, - 
(i) 
The superannuation or early pension shall be equal to the aggregate of: - 
(a) 
pension as determined under sub-paragraph (2) for the period of service rendered from the 16th 
November, 1995 or Rs. 335/- per month whichever is more ; 
(b) 
past service pension as provided in sub-paragraph (3). 
 
(ii) 
The aggregate of (a) and (b) calculated as above shall be subject to the minimum of Rs. 500/- 
per month, provided the eligible service is 24 years. Provided further, if it is less than 24 years 
the, pension shall be proportionately lesser but subject to the minimum of Rs. 265/- per month 
(6) 
Except as otherwise expressly provided hereinafter the monthly member's pension under sub- 
paragraphs (2) to (5) mentioned hereinabove, as the case may be, shall be payable from a date 
immediately following the date of completion of 58 years of age notwithstanding that the 
member has retired or ceased to be in the employment before that date. 
(7) 
A member if he so desires, may be allowed to draw an early pension from a date earlier than 58 
years of age but not earlier than 50 years of age. In such cases, the amount of pension shall be 
reduced at the rate of four per cent, for every year the age falls short of 58 years. 
(7A) monthly members pension including any relief payable to any existing or future member under 
this paragraph shall not be less than one thousand rupees. 
Provided that, on and from the first day of September, 2014, the minimum pension of one 
thousand rupees payable under this subparagraph shall be subject to – 
(i) 
deductions on account of benefits of commutation and return of capital taken by members under 
the extant provisions of this scheme prior to 26th September, 2008; and 
 
(ii) 
deductions on account of early pension under subparagraph (7). 
 
 
(7B) (a) a member who has attained the age of fifty-eight years and is otherwise eligible for pension 
under clause (a) of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, if he so desires, may be allowed to defer 
the age of drawing pension later than fifty-eight years but not beyond sixty years of age. 
(b) 
In such cases as is referred to in clause (a), - 
(i) 
the amount of pension shall be increased at the rate of four per cent. for every completed year 
after the age of fifty-eight years which shall be restricted to the wage ceiling given under the 
proviso to sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 3; 
(ii) 
the member, at his or her option, may also be allowed to continue contributions under paragraph 
3 to the Employees' Pension Fund for the period for which the drawal of pension has been 
deferred, if the member is continuing in employment after the age of fifty-eight years, and the 
pensionable service and pensionable salary for the purpose of determination of pension under 
sub-paragraph (2) will be reckoned taking into account the period for which contributions were 
made after the age of fifty-eight years but not beyond the age of sixty years ; 
(iii) 
in the event of death of the member, who has opted for deferring the age of drawing pension 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
under this sub-paragraph, after attaining the age of fifty-eight years and before the 
commencement of the pension so deferred, the family of the member will be entitled to pension 
under clause (c) of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 16 from the date following the date of death 
of the member as if the member monthly pension had commenced on the date of death of the 
member. 
(8) 
lf a member ceases to be in the employment by way of retirement or otherwise earlier than the 
date of superannuation from which pension can be drawn, the member may, on his option, either 
be paid pension as admissible under this Scheme on attaining the age exceeding 50 years or he 
may be issued a scheme certificate by the Commissioner indicating the pensionable service, the 
pensionable salary and the amount of pension due on the date of exit from the employment. lf 
he/she is subsequently employed in an establishment coverable under this Scheme, his/her earlier 
service as per the scheme certificate shall be reckoned for pension along with the fresh spell of 
pensionable service. The member postponing the commencement of payment of pension under 
this paragraph shall also be entitled to additional relief sanctioned under this Scheme from time 
to time: 
Provided that if the member does not take up an employment coverable under this Scheme and 
has rendered less than ten years eligible service on the date of exit, but dies before attaining the 
age of fifty-eight years and before a continuous period of thirty-six months has elapsed during 
which contributions have not been received in respect of the member in the Pension Fund, the 
amount of contributions received in his case shall be converted into a monthly widow pension or 
children pension and the widow pension in such cases shall be calculated at the scale laid down 
in Table ' C ' and the children pension at 25 per cent thereof for each child (upto two) : 
Provided further that if there is no widow, then the orphan pension shall be payable at the rate of 
75 per cent of the amount which would have been payable as a widow pension subject to the 
provisions of the paragraph 16 : 
Provided also that if the member does not take up an employment coverable under this Scheme 
and has rendered less than ten years eligible service on the date of exit; but dies before attaining 
the age of fifty-eight years after a continuous period of thirty-six months has elapsed during 
which contributions have not been received in respect of the member in the Pension Fund, the 
family shall be entitled to benefits under paragraph 14. 
[12-A. Option for Commutation -- Deleted by G.S.R.688(E) dated 26.09.2008 
w.e.f.26.09.2008] 
[12-B. Restoration to normal pension in cases of grant of commutation. - The normal 
pension in respect of those members who availed the benefit of commutation of pension 
under the erstwhile paragraph 12A of this Scheme, on or before the 25th day of September, 
2008, shall be restored after completion of fifteen years from the date of such commutation.] 
[Inserted vide G.S.R.132(E) dated 20.02.2020 w.e.f.20.02.2020] 
[13. Option for Return of Capital -- Deleted by G.S.R.688(E) dated 26.09.2008 w.e.f. 
26.09.2008] 
 
14. Benefits on leaving service before being eligible for monthly member's pension. - If a member has not 
rendered the eligible service specified in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 12 on the date of exit, 
or on attaining the 58 years of age, whichever is earlier, such member shall be entitled to a 
withdrawal benefit as laid down in Table ' D ' or may opt to receive the Scheme certificate 
provided on the date he has not attained 58 years of age: 
Provided that for calculating such withdrawal benefit, the wages at exit shall be the weighted 
average of his wages at the end of every wage ceiling period: 
Provided further that an existing member shall receive additional return of contributions for his 
past service under the Employees' Family Pension Scheme, 1971, computed as withdrawal- 
cum-retirement benefits as per Table ' A' multiplied by the factor given in Table ' B '. 
15. Benefits on permanent and total disablement during the service. - (1) A member, who is permanently 
and totally disabled during the employment shall be entitled to pension as admissible under 
paragraph 12 subject to a minimum of Rs. 250/- per month notwithstanding the fact that he/she 
has not rendered the pensionable service entitling him/her to pension under paragraph 12 
provided that she/he has made at least one month's contribution to the Pension Fund. 
(2) 
The monthly member's pension in such cases shall be payable from the date following the date 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
of permanent total disablement and shall be tenable for the life-time of the member. 
(3) 
A member applying for benefits under this paragraph shall be required to undergo such medical 
examination as may be prescribed by the Central Board to determine whether or not he or she is 
permanently and totally unfit for the employment which he or she was doing at the time of such 
disablement. 
16. Benefits to the family on the death of a member. - (1) Pension to the family shall be admissible from 
the date following the date of death of the member if the member dies - 
(a) 
while in service, provided that at least one month's contribution has been paid into the 
Employees' Pension Fund, or 
(b) 
after the date of exit but before attaining the age of 58, from the employment having rendered 
service entitling him/her to monthly member's pension but before the commencement of pension 
payment or 
(c) 
after commencement of payment of the monthly member's pension. 
 
Note : -  The cases where a member has rendered less than 10 years eligible service on the date of exit but 
has retained the membership of the Pension Fund, and dies before attaining the age of 58 years, 
shall be regulated under sub-paragraph (8) of paragraph 12. 
(2) (a) The monthly widow pension shall be : - 
(i) 
in the cases covered by clause (a) of sub-paragraph (1), equal to the monthly member's pension 
which would have been admissible as if the member had retired on the date of death or Rs. 450/- 
or the amount indicated in Table ' C ' whichever is more. 
(ii) 
in the cases covered by clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1), equal to the monthly member's pension 
which would have been admissible as if the member had retired on the date of exit or Rs. 450/- 
per month or the amount indicated in Table ' C ' whichever is more. 
(iii) 
in the cases covered by clause (c) of sub-paragraph (1), equal to 50 per cent. of the monthly 
member's pension payable to the member on the date of his death subject to a minimum of Rs. 
450/- per month. 
 
(iv) 
in all the cases, where the amount of family pension sanctioned under the ceased Family Pension 
Scheme, 1971 and is paid/payable under this scheme is less than Rs. 450 per month the amount 
of family pension in such cases shall be enhanced to Rs. 450/- per month. 
 
(v) 
in all the cases, where the monthly widow pension including relief, if any, is less than one 
thousand rupees per month, the amount of monthly widow pension in such cases shall be 
enhanced to one thousand rupees per month. 
(b)  the monthly widow pension shall be payable upto the date of death of the widow or remarriage 
whichever is earlier. 
Note :- In cases where there are 2 or more widows, family pension shall be payable to the eldest 
surviving widow. On her death it shall be payable to the next surviving widow, if any. The term 
"eldest" would mean seniority with reference to the date of marriage. 
(3) 
Monthly children pension: - 
(a) 
If there are any surviving children of the deceased member, falling within the definition of 
family, they shall be entitled to a monthly children pension in addition to the monthly 
widow/widower pension. 
(b) 
Monthly children pension for each child shall be equal to 25 per cent. of the amount admissible 
to the widow of the deceased member as monthly widow pension payable under clause (a) of 
sub- paragraph (2): 
Provided that the minimum monthly children pension including relief, if any, for each child of 
the deceased member shall not be less than two hundred and fifty rupees per month. 
(c) 
Monthly children pension shall be payable until the child attains the age of 25 years. 
(d) 
The monthly children pension shall be admissible to maximum of two children at a time and will 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
run from the oldest to the youngest child in that order. 
(e) 
If a member dies leaving behind a family having son or daughter who is permanently and totally 
disabled, such son or daughter shall be entitled to payment of monthly children pension or orphan 
pension, as the case may be, irrespective of age and number of children in the family in addition 
to the pension provided under clause (d). 
(4)(a) If the deceased member is not survived by any widow, but is survived by children falling within 
the definition of family or if the widow pension is not payable, the children shall be entitled to a 
monthly orphan pension equal to 75 percent of the amount of the monthly widow pension as 
payable under clause (a) of subparagraph (2): 
Provided that the minimum monthly orphan pension including relief, if any, for each orphan 
shall not be less than seven hundred and fifty rupees per month. 
(aa) The monthly orphan pension shall be payable to each orphan till such orphan attains the age of 
twenty-five years: 
 
Provided that the monthly orphan pension shall be payable to an orphan beyond the age of 
twenty-five years, if such orphan is suffering from disorder or disability of mind or who is 
physically crippled or disabled. 
(b) 
In the event of death or remarriage of the widow/ widower after sanctioning of widow/widower 
pension the children shall be entitled in lieu of the monthly children pension, to a monthly orphan 
pension from the date following the date of death/remarriage of the widow/widower. 
(c) 
The monthly orphan pension shall be admissible to a maximum of 2 orphans at a time and shall 
run in order from the oldest to the youngest orphan. 
(5) (a) A member who is not married or who does not have any living spouse and/or an eligible child 
may nominate a person to receive benefits as laid down hereinafter provided that in the event of 
his/her acquiring a family subsequently, the nomination so made shall become void. In the event 
of death of the member such a nominee shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension equal to 
the monthly widow pension, as admissible under sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (a) of sub- 
paragraph (2). 
(aa)  If a member dies leaving behind no spouse and/or an eligible child falling within the definition 
of family and no nomination by such deceased member exists, the widow pension shall be paid 
under sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (a) of subparagraph 2 either to dependant father or 
dependent mother as the case may be. On grant of pension to such dependant father and in the 
event of death of the father pensioner, the admissible pension shall be extended to the surviving 
mother lifelong. 
(b)  If the deceased member had not rendered pensionable service on the date of exit from the 
employment which would have made him entitled to a monthly members pension under 
paragraph 12, but had opted to retain the membership of his Scheme under sub- paragraph (8) of 
paragraph 12, the nominee or the dependant father or the dependant mother, as the case may be, 
shall be entitled to a withdrawal benefit as provided in paragraph 14. 
 
 
16-A. Guarantee of pensionary benefits. - None of the pensionary benefits under the Scheme shall be 
denied to any member or beneficiary for want of compliance of the requirement by the employer 
under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3 provided, however, that the employer shall not be 
absolved of his liabilities under the Scheme. 
17. Payments on exercise of option. - (1) Beneficiaries of the deceased members of Employees' Family 
Pension Scheme, referred to in sub-para (1) of paragraph 7, shall receive higher of the benefits 
available under the Employees' Family Pension Scheme, 1971 and under this Scheme. 
(2) 
Members referred to in sub-paragraph (2) of Paragraph 7 shall have the option to join the Scheme 
by returning the amount of withdrawal benefit received, if any, together with interest at the rate 
of 8.5% per annum from the date of payment of such withdrawal benefits and date of exercise of 
the option, to receive monthly pension as per the provisions of this Scheme. 
 
 
(3) 
Members referred to in sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 7 shall be deemed to have joined the 
ceased Employees' Family Pension Scheme, 1971, with effect from 1-3-1971 on remittance of 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
past period contribution with interest thereon. 
17-A. Payment of Pension. - The claims, complete in all respects submitted along with the requisite 
documents shall be settled and benefit amount paid to the beneficiaries within twenty days from 
the date of its receipt by the Commissioner. If there is any deficiency in the claim, the same shall 
be recorded in writing and communicated to the applicant within twenty days from the date of 
receipt of such application. In case the Commissioner fails without sufficient cause to settle a 
claim complete in all respects within twenty days, the Commissioner shall be liable for the delay 
beyond the said period and penal interest at the rate of 12 per cent. per annum may be charged 
on the benefit amount and the same may be deducted from the salary of the Commissioner. 
18. Particulars to be supplied by the employees already employed at the time of commencement of the 
Employees' Pension Scheme. - Every person who is entitled to become a member of the 
Employees' Pension Fund shall be asked forthwith by his employer to furnish and that person 
shall, on such demand, furnish to him for communication to the Commissioner particulars 
concerning himself and his family in the form prescribed by the Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner. 
 
19. Preparation of Contribution Cards. - The employer shall prepare an Employees' Pension Fund 
Contribution Card in respect of each employee who has become a member of the Employees' 
Pension Fund. 
20. Duties of Employers. - (1) Every employer shall send to the Commissioner within three months of the 
commencement of this Scheme, a consolidated return of the employees entitled to become 
members of the Employees' Pension Fund showing the basic wage, retaining allowance, if any, 
and dearness allowance including the cash value of any food concession paid to each of such 
employees: 
Provided that if there is no employee who is entitled to become a member of the Employees' 
Pension Fund, the employer, shall send a ' Nil ' return. 
(2) 
Every employer shall send to the Commissioner within fifteen days of the close of each month a 
return in respect of the employees leaving service of the employer during the preceding month: 
Provided that if there is no employee leaving service of the employer during the preceding month 
the employer shall send a ' NIL ' return. 
(3) 
Every employer shall maintain such accounts in relation to the amounts contributed by him to 
the Employees' Pension Fund as the Central Board may, from time to time, direct and it shall be 
the duty of every employer to assist the Central Board in making such payments from the 
Employees' Pension Fund to his employees as are sanctioned by or under the authority of the 
Central Board. 
(4) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this paragraph, the Central Board may issue such 
directions to the employers generally, as it may consider necessary or expedient, for the purpose 
of implementing the Scheme, and it shall be the duty of every employer to carry out such 
directions. 
(5) 
Every employer shall send to the Commissioner, an electronic format of the returns referred to 
in sub-paragraphs (1) and (2), in such form and manner as may be specified by the 
Commissioner. 
21. Employer to furnish particulars of ownership. - Every employer in relation to a factory or other 
establishment to which the Act applies or is applied hereafter shall furnish to the Commissioner 
particulars of all the branches and departments, owners, occupiers, directors, partners, managers 
or any other person or persons who have the ultimate control over the affairs of such factory or 
establishment and also send intimation of any change in such particulars, within fifteen days of 
such change, to the Commissioner by registered post. 
22. Duties of contractors: - Every contractor shall, within seven days of the close of every month, submit 
to the principal employer a statement showing the particulars in respect of employees employed 
by or through him in respect of whom contributions to the Employees' Pension Fund are payable 
and shall also furnish to him such information as the principal employer is required to furnish 
under the provisions of this Scheme to the Commissioner. 
23. Allotment of Account Numbers. - (1) For purposes of this Scheme, where the member has already 
been allotted or is allotted hereafter an account number under the Employees Provident Fund 
Scheme, 1952, he shall retain the same account number. 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
(2) 
In the case of employees of the establishments exempted from the Employees' provident Fund 
Scheme, 1952, under Section 17 of the Act, who are members of the Employees' Family Pension 
Fund the account number already allotted shall be retained by them. 
(3) 
In the case of employees of the establishments exempted from the Employees' Provident Fund 
Scheme, 1952, under Section 17 of the Act, who are not members of the Employees' Family 
Pension Fund but opt to become members of the Employees' Pension Fund and in case of new 
employees of such establishments, fresh account numbers shall be allotted by the Commissioner. 
24. Declaration by persons taking up employment after the Fund has been established. - The employer 
shall before take any person into employment, ask him/her to state in writing whether or not he 
is a member of the Employees' Pension Fund and, if he/she is, also ask him/her to furnish a 
copy of the Scheme Certificate issued by the Commissioner to him/her in respect of the past 
employment in terms of paragraph 12 as the case may be. If the person concerned was not in 
employment previously or had availed of return of contribution in respect of his/her previous 
employment, he/she shall, on demand by the employer, furnish to him, for communication to the 
Commissioner particulars concerning him/herself and his/her family in the Form prescribed by 
the Central Provident Fund Commissioner:  
 
Provided that if such person is a person with disability, the aforesaid Form shall further contain 
such particulars as are necessary for such person. 
25. Employees' Pension Fund Account. - The account called the "Employees' Pension Fund Account" 
shall be opened by the Commissioner in such manner as may be specified by the Central Board 
with the approval of Central Government. 
26. Investment of the Employees' Pension Fund. - (l): All moneys accruing to Employees' Pension Fund 
Account except the contributions of the Central Government shall be invested in accordance with 
the provisions of paragraph 52 of the Employees' Provident Funds Scheme, 1952. 
(2) 
Net assets of the Family Pension Fund as on the 16.l1.1995 shall merge in the Pension Fund and 
remain invested in the Public Account of the Government of India. The future Central 
Government's contribution accruing to the Pension Fund from 17th November, 1995 onwards 
shall also be invested in the Public Account of the Government of India. 
27. Disposal of the Fund. – (l) Subject to the provisions of the Act and this Scheme, the Fund shall not, 
except with the prior sanction of the Central Government be expended for any purpose other than 
the payments envisaged in this Scheme, for continued payment of Family Pension, life assurance 
benefit and retirement-cum-withdrawal benefits sanctioned under the Employees' Family 
Pension Scheme, 1971, prior to the date of introduction of this Scheme or which may be 
sanctioned under that Scheme after the 16th November, 1995 in respect of cases arising before 
that date. 
(2) 
All administrative expenses shall be met from the 'Central Administration Account' as specified 
in paragraph 49 of the Employees' Provident Funds Scheme, 1952. However, the cost of 
remittance of Pension shall be charged on the Pension Fund. 
28. Administration Account.  [Omitted by G.S.R 3 dated 29.12.2006 w.e.f. 06.01.2007] 
29. Format and manner of maintenance of Accounts. - Format and manner of maintenance of 
Accounts. The Central Board shall maintain a consolidated income and expenditure account as 
well as a consolidated balance sheet in respect of the Pension Scheme, in the common format 
of annual accounts, approved by the Central Government. 
[Subs. by GS.R. 285 (E), dated the 4th April, 2019 (with effect from 4th April, 2019)]. 
30. Audit. -The accounts of the Employees' Pension Fund including the administrative expenses incurred 
in running this Scheme shall be audited in accordance with the instructions issued by the Central 
Government in consultation with Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
31. Rounding up of the Benefits. - All items of benefits shall be calculated to the nearest rupee, 50 paise 
or more to be counted as the next higher rupee and fraction of a rupee less than 50 paise shall be 
ignored. 
32. Valuation of the Employees' Pension Fund and review of the rates of contributions and quantum of 
the pension and other benefits. - (1) The Central Government shall have an annual valuation of 
the Employees' Pension Fund made by a Valuer appointed by it. 
(2)  At any time, when the Employees' Pension Fund so permits the Central Government may alter 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
the rate of contributions payable under this Scheme or the scale of any benefit admissible under 
this Scheme or the period for which such benefit may be given. 
33. Disbursement of Pension and other benefits. – (1) The Commissioner shall with the approval of the 
Central Board, enter into arrangement for the disbursement of pension and other benefits under 
this Scheme with disbursing agencies like Post Office or Nationalised Banks or Treasuries or 
Scheduled Commercial banks including Regional Rural banks or Co-operative Banks through 
electronic or digital funds transfer system  
(2) The Commission payable to the disbursing agencies and other charges incidental thereto 
shall be met as provided in paragraph 27 of the Scheme. 
34. Registers, Records, etc. - The Commissioner shall, with the approval of the Central Board, prescribe 
the registers and records to be maintained in respect of the employees, the form or design of any 
identity card, token or disc for the purpose of identifying any employee or his nominee or a 
member of a family entitled to receive the pension and such other forms/formalities as have to 
be completed in connection with the grant of pension and other benefits or for the continuance 
thereof subject to such periodical verification as may be considered necessary. 
35. Power to issue directions. - The Central Government may issue; such directions as may be deemed just 
and proper by it for resolving any difficulty in the disbursement of pension and other benefits or 
for resolving any difficulty in implementation of this Scheme. 
36. Regional Committee. - The Regional Committee set up under paragraph 4 of the Employees' Provident 
Funds Scheme, 1952, shall advise the Central Board, on such matters, in relation to the 
administration of this Scheme as the Central Board may refer to it from time to time and in 
particular, on - 
(a) 
progress of recovery of contributions under this Scheme both from factories and establishments 
exempted under Section 17 of the Act and other factories and establishments covered under the 
Act. 
(b) 
expeditious disposal of prosecutions. 
(c) 
speedy settlement of claims relating to pension and other benefits under this Scheme. 
37. Annual Report. -The Central Board shall cause to be included in the Annual Report on the working of 
the Scheme prepared under paragraph 74 of the Employees' Provident Fund Scheme, 1952, a 
report on the working of this Scheme during the previous financial year. 
38. Application of the provisions of the Employees' Provident Funds Scheme, 1952. - In regard to matters 
for which either there is no provision or there is inadequate provisions in this Scheme the 
corresponding provisions in the Employees' Provident Funds Scheme, 1952, shall apply. 
39. Exemption from the operation of the Pension Scheme. - The appropriate Government may grant 
exemption to any establishment or class of establishments from the operation of this Scheme, if 
the employees of the establishments are either members of any other pension scheme or proposed 
to be members of a pension scheme wherein the pensionary benefits are at par or more favourable 
than the benefits provided under this Scheme. Where exemption is granted to any establishment 
or class of establishments under this paragraph, withdrawal benefits available to the credit of the 
employees of such establishment(s) under the ceased Family Pension Scheme, 1971, shall be 
paid, subject to the consent of the employees, to the pension fund of the establishment(s) so 
exempted. An application for exemption under this paragraph shall be presented to the Regional 
Provident Fund Commissioner having jurisdiction by the establishment or class of 
establishments, together with a copy of the pension scheme of the establishment(s) and other 
relevant documents, as may be called for by him. On receipt of such an application, the Regional 
Provident Fund Commissioner shall scrutinise it, obtain the recommendations of the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner and submit the same to the appropriate Government for decision, 
pending disposal of application for exemption under this paragraph employers' share of the 
contribution shall not be remitted to the pension fund as envisaged in sub-paragraph (1) of 
paragraph 3. An application for exemption presented under this paragraph shall be disposed of 
within a period of six months from the date of its receipt or such further time as may be extended 
for reasons to be recorded in writing. If the application for exemption is not disposed of within 
the period so specified, the exemption applied for shall be deemed to have been granted. 
Explanation. - For the purpose of this paragraph, the period of six months will count from the date on 
which the application for exemption is given in complete form to the satisfaction of the Regional 
Provident Fund Commissioner. 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
39-A. Submission of Return. - The employer of the exempted establishment or class of establishments 
and/or the Board of Trustees of the exempted establishment or class of establishments shall 
submit a monthly return to the Commissioner in Form - 1 and such return shall also be submitted 
in electronic format in such form and manner as may be specified by the Commissioner. 
 
 
 
FORM 1 
 
(See paragraph 39 A) 
 
Monthly Return to be submitted by the exempted establishments/class of establishments/Board of Trustees. 
 
 
 
1. DETAILS OF ESTABLISHMENT :  
(a)
Name of the establishment with full of address
(b)
Code No. allotted by the Employees’ Provident Fund Organization
2.  DETAILS OF EMPLOYEES (INCLUDE ALL BRANCHES/UNITS ETC. 
(a)
No. of employees as at the end of previous month
(b
No. of employees who joined during month
(c)
No. of employees who left service during the month
(d) 
No. of employees as at the end of the month  
[(a) + (b) – (c)]
 
(e)
Out of (d) above, No. of excluded employees
(f) 
No. of Pension Fund members as at the end of the 
month [Please furnish the above-mentioned details 
unit wise situated as different places. Attach 
separate sheet, if necessary]
 
 
 
3.  CONSTITUTION OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
(a) 
 
Date on which the present Board was 
Constituted 
DD 
MM 
YYYY 
(b)
Its term
YEARS
(c)
Total number of Trustees
(i)
Employees’ Representatives
(ii)
Employer’s Representatives
4.  WAGES CONTRIBUTION ETC. 
(a) 
Amount of gross wages liable to Pension 
Contribution
Rs. 
(b)
Rate of contribution to Pension Fund 
%
(c)   Amount of Pension contribution to be transferred for 
the current month
Rs. 
(d)   Amount of arrears due, if any, for transfer to the 
Board of Trustees at the end of the previous month
Rs. 
(e)
Total of (c) & (d)
Rs.
(f)   Amount actually transferred to the Board of Trustees
Rs.
(g)   Balance due, if any, for transfer to the Board of 
Trustees [(e) – (f)]
Rs. 
(h) 
Whether the interest payable under Section 7Q of 
the Act for the belated transfer of Funds, if any, 
has been paid? 
YES                         NO 
(i)   Amount of interest still payable at the end of the 
month
Rs. 
5.  DETAILS OF PENSIONERS 
(a)
No. of Pensioners at the end of the month
(i)
Member (Self) Pensioners
- Superannuation Pension
- Early Pension

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
- Disablement Pension
(ii)
Spouse Pensioners
- Death in service
- Death away from service
- Death as pensioners
(iii)
Children Pensioners
- Normal Children
- Disabled Children (Life-long pension)
(iv)
Orphan Pensioner
(v)
Nominee Pensioner
(vi)
Dependent Parents Pensioner
(b)
Total amount of Pension paid during the month
Rs.
6.  DETAILS OF EXIT CASES 
(a) 
No. of Persons who have taken Withdrawal benefit during 
the month
 
(b)   
Amount paid during the month
Rs.
No. of exit cases where Scheme certificate has been issued.
7.  DETAILS OF INVESTMENT 
(a) 
   Amount lying invested in the Pension Fund in  
  the beginning of the month
Rs. 
(b) 
 Amount received during the month
(i)
By way of contribution from the employer
Current month
Rs.
Arrears, if any
Rs.
(ii)
Encashment of matured securities/deposits
Rs.
(iii)
Interest/dividend on investments
Rs.
(iv)
Other transfer-in-cases
Rs.
(v)
Damages, if any
Rs.
(vi)
Interest on belated payments, if any
Rs.
(vii)
Miscellaneous, if any (Please specify)
Rs.
(c)
Payments made during the month
Rs.
(d)
Amount invested during the month
Rs.
Securities
- Central Government
Rs.
- State Governments
Rs.
- Others, if any
Rs.
Deposits
- Public Financial Institutions/Banks
Rs.
(e)
Whether pattern of investment followed?
YES       NO
(f)
If so, classify the percentage
(i)
Securities
- Central Government
%
- State Government
%
- Others
%
(ii)
Deposits
- Public Financial Institutions/Banks
%
    
(iii) 
Annuity purchased from Life Insurance 
Corporation
Rs. 
(g)
Amount lying un-invested in Cash/Bank
Rs.
8. 
MODE OF DISBURSEMENT [Tick one] 
- Through Bank
- Through Post Offices
- Through LIC by purchase of Annuity
- Others, if any, (Please specify)
9.    RULES OF ESTABLISHMENT ‘S PENSION FUND 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
         Details of amendment, if any carried out during 
the month to make the Rules at par with the 
Statutory Pension Scheme (Employees’ Pension 
Scheme, 1995)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date  
Signature with official seal of the 
 Employer/Trustees of the Board 
 
 
39-B. Transfer Value. –In case exemption is granted to any establishment or in the case of a member being 
transferred from pension fund of one exempted establishment to another pension fund of 
exempted establishment or statutory pension fund or vice-versa, a transfer value payment will be 
made which will consist of the following:- 
(a) 
 Withdrawal benefit relating to past service period upto 15-11-995 as per Table-A multiplied 
by Table-B factor for the period between 16-11-1995 to the date of exemption/transfer, and 
(b) 
Transfer value for pensionable service as per Table-E for the service rendered from 16-11-1995 
or from the date of joining the establishment to the date of exemption/transfer as the case may 
be. 
(c) 
In the event of cancellation of exemption granted under Para 39, transfer of fund will be made 
as per the conditions mentioned in the exemption notification. 
40. Information to the Central Government. - The Central Board shall furnish such information to the 
Central Government from time to time in respect of the income and expenditure from the 
Employees' Pension fund account in such manner as may be directed by the Central Government. 
41. Interpretation. - Where any doubt arises with regard to the interpretation of the provisions of this 
Scheme, it shall be referred to the Central Government who shall decide the same. 
42. Punishment for failure to submit return, etc. - If any person, 
 
(a) 
deducts or attempts to deduct from the wages or other remuneration of the member, the whole 
or any part of the employer's contribution; or 
(b) 
fails or refuses to submit any return, statement or other documents required by this Scheme or 
submits a false returns, statement or other documents, or makes a false declaration; or 
(c) 
obstructs any Inspector or other official appointed under the Act or this Scheme in the discharge 
of his duties or fails to produce any record for inspection by such inspector or other officials; or 
(d) 
is guilty of contravention of or non-compliance with any other requirement of this Scheme, he 
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees or with both. 
43. Payment of pension in the case of a person charged with the offence of murder. – (1) If a person, who 
in the event of the death of a member of the Pension Fund is eligible to receive pension of the 
deceased under paragraph 12 or paragraph 16, is charged with the offence of murdering the 
member or for abetting the commission of such an offence, his claims to receive pension shall 
remain suspended till the conclusion of the criminal proceedings instituted against him for such 
offence. 
(2) 
If on the conclusion of the criminal proceedings referred to in sub-paragraph (1), the person 
concerned is: 
(a) 
convicted for the murder or abetting in the murder of the member, he shall be debarred from 
receiving pension which shall be payable to other eligible members if any, of the family of the 
member; or 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
(b) 
acquitted of the charge of murder or abetting the murder of the member, pension benefit shall be 
payable to him. 
43A. Special provisions in respect of International Workers. - The Scheme shall, in its application to 
International Workers as defined in this paragraph, be subject to the following modifications, 
namely: 
(1) 
 After clause (vii) of paragraph 2, the following clause shall be inserted, namely: 
(viiia) “International Worker” means, - 
(a) 
an Indian employee having worked or going to work in a foreign country with which India has 
entered into a social security agreement and being eligible to avail the benefits under a social 
security programme of that country, by virtue of the eligibility gained or going to gain, under the 
said agreement; 
(b) 
an employee other than an Indian employee, holding other than an Indian passport, working for 
an establishment in India to which the Act applies. 
Provided that the worker who is a Nepalese national on account of Treaty of Peace and 
Friendship of 1950 and the worker who is a Bhutanese national on account of India-Bhutan 
Friendship Treaty of 2007, shall be deemed to be an Indian Worker. 
(2) 
For clause (xv) of paragraph 2, the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- 
 
(xv) *** 
 
(3) 
Sub- paragraphs (2), (3) and (4) of paragraph 3, shall be omitted. 
 
(4) 
Proviso to sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 4, shall be omitted. 
(4A) For paragraph 9 of the principal Scheme, the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely : 
“9. 
Determination of eligible service in respect of International Workers. - The eligible service 
shall be determined as follows: 
 
(i) 
In the case of “existing member” or the “new entrant”, the “actual service” shall be treated as 
eligible service. 
(ii) 
in the case of the member covered by a social security agreement, the period of coverage under 
relevant social security programme in another country shall be added to actual service and the 
aggregate thereof shall be treated as eligible service as may be provided in the social security 
agreement.” 
(5) 
For sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 10, the following sub-paragraph shall be substituted, namely: 
(1) *** 
 
(6) 
For paragraph 11, the following paragraph shall be substituted namely:- 
 
“11. Determination of pensionable salary:- The pensionable salary shall be the average monthly pay 
drawn in any manner including on piece-rate basis during the contributory period of service of 
the membership of the Employees’ Pension Fund.” 
(7) 
For paragraph 14, the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely:- 
 
“14. Benefits on leaving service before being eligible for monthly members’ pension:- (1) An 
International Worker covered under a social security agreement entered into between India and 
another country who has not rendered the eligible service prescribed in paragraph 9 on the date 
of exit, or on attaining the age of 58 years, whichever is earlier, shall be entitled to a totalisation 
benefit as may be provided in the said social security agreement : 
Provided that if the International worker covered under the provisions of the said agreement has 
not rendered the eligible service even after including the totalisation benefit as may be provided 
in the said agreement, then such International Worker shall be entitled to a withdrawal benefit as 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
laid down under Table ‘D’.” 
(8) 
After paragraph 33, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
Provided that if the beneficiary under the scheme is covered under a social security agreement 
between India and another country, the pension and other benefits under the Scheme shall be 
disbursed in the manner and as per the terms and conditions specified in the said agreement. 
(9) 
After paragraph 35, the following paragraph shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
“35.A. Performing certain functions under the social security agreement. - The Commissioner shall 
perform all such functions as are assigned to the Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation under 
a social security agreement entered into between the Government of India and any other country, 
in a manner and as per the terms and conditions specified therein.” 
43-B.  Special provision in respect of Employees’ Enrolment Campaign, 2017. - The exceptions and 
modifications subject to which the provisions of this Scheme shall apply, in relation to the 
employees whose membership have been declared under paragraph 82A of the Employees. 
Provident Fund Scheme, 1952, in accordance with the Employees’ Enrolment Campaign, 2017, 
shall be as follows, namely: - 
In paragraph 5, in sub-paragraph (1), for the Table, the following Table shall be substituted, 
namely: - 
TABLE 
 
(Applicable for remittances in respect of valid declarations under Employees’ Enrolment Campaign, 2017) 
 
Period of default 
Rate of damages 
Between the 1st day of April, 2009 to the 31st day of 
December, 2016 
One rupee per annum. 
 
 
29. Repeal and savings. – On commencement of this Scheme, the Employees' Family Pension 
Scheme, 1971, in force immediately before such commencement shall cease to operate with 
effect from the 16th November, 1995. 
(2) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-paragraph (1) every nomination made under the 
Employees' Family Pension Scheme, 1971, and every form regarding the details of Family of an 
employee for the purposes of the Employees' Family Pension Scheme, 1971, shall be deemed to 
have been made under the provisions of this Scheme. 
 
(3) 
All orders/authorisations/Pension Payment Orders issued under the Family Pension Scheme, 
shall be deemed to have been made under this Scheme. 
 
TABLE - A 
 
(See Paragraph 14) 
(WITHDRAWAL BENEFIT) 
 
No. 
of 
full 
years’ 
contribution paid 
Proportion of pay payable 
at 
cessation 
of 
membership 
No. 
of 
full 
years’ 
contribution paid 
Proportion of pay payable 
at 
cessation 
of 
membership 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
1 
0.2 
21 
5.21 
2 
0.41 
22 
5.52 
3 
0.62 
23 
5.83 
4 
0.84 
24 
6.14 
5 
1.06 
25 
6.46 
6 
1.29 
26 
6.79 
7 
1.51 
27 
7.12 
8 
1.75 
28 
7.46 
9 
1.98 
29 
7.81 
10 
2.23 
30 
8.16 
11 
2.47 
31 
8.52 
12 
2.72 
32 
8.89 
13 
2.98 
33 
9.26 
14 
3.24 
34 
9.64 
15 
3.51 
35 
10.03 
16 
3.78 
36 
10.43 
17 
4.05 
37 
10.83 
18 
4.34 
38 
11.24 
19 
4.62 
39 
11.66 
20 
4.92 
40 
12.08 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
TABLE - B 
 
(See Paragraphs 12 and 14) 
 
(FACTOR FOR COMPUTATION OF PAST SERVICE BENEFIT UNDER THE CEASED FAMILY 
PENSION SCHEME FOR EXISTING MEMBERS ON EXIT FROM THE 
EMPLOYMENT) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Inserted vide G.S.R.325(E) dated 14.06.2024 w.e.f.14.06.2024] 
YEARS 
FACTOR 
YEARS 
FACTOR 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 
Less than 1 
1.039 
Less than 22 
5.231 
Less than 2 
1.122 
Less than 23 
5.649 
Less than 3 
1.212 
Less than 24 
6.101 
Less than 4 
1.309 
Less than 25 
6.589 
Less than 5 
1.413 
Less than 26 
7.117 
Less than 6 
1.526 
Less than 27 
7.686 
Less than 7 
1.649 
Less than 28 
8.301 
Less than 8 
1.781 
Less than 29 
8.965 
Less than 9 
1.923 
Less than 30 
9.682 
Less than 10 
2.077 
Less than 31 
10.457 
Less than 11 
2.243 
Less than 32 
11.294 
Less than 12 
2.423 
Less than 33 
12.197 
Less than 13 
2.616 
Less than 34 
13.173 
Less than 14 
2.826 
Less than 35 
14.2271 
Less than 15 
3.052 
Less than 36 
15.36555 
Less than 16 
3.296 
Less than 37 
16.59509 
Less than 17 
3.560 
Less than 38 
17.92303 
Less than 18 
3.845 
Less than 39 
19.35722 
Less than 19 
4.152 
Less than 40 
 20.90618 
Less than 20 
4.485 
Less than 41 
 22.57909 
Less than 21 
4.843 
Less than 42 
24.38586 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
 
 
TABLE - C 
 
(See Paragraph 16) 
(EQUIVALENT WIDOW PENSION) 
 
Salary at day of death not 
more than 
 
Equivalent 
widow 
pension 
 
Salary at day of death 
not more than 
 
Equivalent 
widow 
pension 
(Rupees) 
(Rupees) 
(Rupees) 
(Rupees) 
Upto 300 
250 
1300 
646 
350 
327 
1350 
664 
400 
343 
1400 
682 
450 
359 
1450 
700 
500 
375 
1500 
718 
550 
391 
1550 
736 
600 
408 
1600 
754 
650 
425 
1650 
772 
700 
442 
1700 
797 
750 
459 
1750 
808 
800 
476 
1800 
826 
850 
493 
1850 
844 
900 
510 
1900 
862 
950 
527 
1950 
880 
1000 
544 
2000 
898 
1050 
561 
2050 
916 
1100 
578 
2100 
935 
1150 
595 
2150 
954 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
 
 
1200 
612 
2200 
973 
1250 
629 
2250 
992 
2300 
1011 
3400 
1441 
2350 
1030 
3450 
1461 
2400 
1049 
3500 
1481 
2450 
1068 
3550 
1501 
2500 
1087 
3600 
1521 
2550 
1106 
3650 
1541 
2600 
1125 
3700 
1561 
2650 
1144 
3750 
1581 
2700 
1163 
3800 
1601 
2750 
1182 
3850 
1621 
2800 
1201 
3900 
1641 
2850 
1221 
3950 
1661 
2900 
1241 
4000 
1681 
2950 
1261 
4050 
1701 
3000 
1281 
4100 
1721 
3050 
1301 
4150 
1741 
3100 
1321 
4200 
1751 
3150 
1341 
4250 
1761 
3200 
1361 
4300 
1771 
3250 
1381 
4350 
1781 
3300 
1401 
4400 
1791 
3350 
1421 
4450 
1801 
4500 
1811 
5550 
1956 
4550 
1821 
5600 
1961 
4600 
1831 
5650 
1966 
4650 
1841 
5700 
1971 
4700 
1851 
5750 
1976 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
4750 
1861 
5800 
1981 
4800 
1871 
5850 
1986 
4850 
1881 
5900 
1991 
4900 
1891 
5950 
1996 
4950 
1896 
6000 
2001 
5000 
1901 
6050 
2006 
5050 
1906 
6100 
2011 
5100 
1911 
6150 
2016 
5150 
1916 
6200 
2021 
5200 
1921 
6250 
2026 
5250 
1926 
6300 
2031 
5300 
1931 
6350 
2036 
5350 
1936 
6400 
2041 
5400 
1941 
6450 
2046 
5450 
1946 
6500 
2051.] 
5500 
1951 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Salary at day of death not 
more than 
 
 
Equivalent widow pension 
 
 
Salary at day of death not 
more than 
 
 
Equivalent 
widow 
pension 
(Rupees) 
(Rupees) 
(Rupees) 
(Rupees) 
[6,550 
2,056 
7,650 
2,166 
6,600 
2,061 
7,700 
2,171 
6,650 
2,066 
7,750 
2,176 
6,700 
2,071 
7,800 
2,181 
6,750 
2,076 
7850 
2,186 
6,800 
2,081 
7,900 
2,191 
6,850 
2,086 
7,950 
2,196 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
6,900 
2,091 
8,000 
2,201 
6,950 
2,096 
8,050 
2,206 
7,000 
2,101 
8,100 
2,211 
7,050 
2,106 
8,150 
2,216 
7,100 
2,111 
8,200 
2,221 
 
7,150 
2,116 
8,250 
2,226 
7,200 
2,121 
8,300 
2,231 
7,250 
2,126 
8,350 
2,236 
7,300 
2,131 
8,400 
2,241 
7,350 
2,136 
8,450 
2,246 
7,400 
2,141 
8,500 
2,251 
7,450 
2,146 
8,550 
2,256 
7,500 
2,151 
8,600 
2,261 
7,550 
2,156 
8,650 
2,266 
7,600 
2,161 
8,700 
2,271 
8,750 
2,276 
9,900 
2,391 
8,800 
2,281 
9,950 
2,396 
8,850 
2,286 
10,000 
2,401 
8,900 
2,291 
10,050 
2,406 
8,950 
2,296 
10,100 
2,411 
9,000 
2,301 
10,150 
2,416 
9,050 
2,306 
10,200 
2,42I 
9,100 
2,311 
10,250 
2,426 
9,150 
2,316 
10,300 
2,431 
9,200 
2,321 
10,350 
2,436 
9,250 
2,326 
10,400 
2,441 
9,300 
2,331 
10,450 
2,446 
9,350 
2,336 
10,500 
2,451 
9,400 
2,341 
10,550 
2,456 
9,450 
2,346 
10,600 
2,461 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
9,500 
2,351 
10,65b 
2,466 
9,550 
2,356 
10,700 
2,471 
9,600 
2,361 
10,750 
2,476 
9,650 
2,366 
10,800 
2,481 
9,700 
2,371 
10,850 
2,486 
9,750 
2,376 
10,900 
2,491 
9,800 
2,381 
10,950 
2,496 
9,850 
2,386 
11,000 
2,501 
11,050 
2,506 
12,200 
2,621 
11,100 
2,511 
12,250 
2,62,6 
11,150 
2,516 
12,300 
2,631 
11,200 
2,521 
12,350 
2,636 
11,250 
2,526 
12,400 
2,641 
11,300 
2,531 
12,450 
2,646 
11,350 
2,536 
12,500 
2,651 
11,400 
2,541 
12,550 
2,656 
11,450 
2,546 
12,600 
2,661 
11,500 
2,551 
12,650 
2,666 
11,550 
2,556 
12,700 
2,671 
11,600 
2,561 
12,750 
2,676 
11,650 
2,566 
12,800 
2,681 
11,700 
2,571 
12,850 
2,686 
11,750 
2,576 
12,900 
2,691 
11,800 
2,581 
12,950 
2,696 
11,850 
2,586 
13,000 
2,701 
11,900 
2,591 
13,050 
2,706 
11,950 
2,596 
13,100 
2,711 
12,000 
2,601 
13,150 
2,716 
12,050 
2,606 
13,200 
2,721 
12,100 
2,611 
13,250 
2,726 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
12,150 
2,616 
13,300 
2,731 
13,350 
2,736 
14,200 
2,821 
13,400 
2,741 
14,250 
2,826 
13,450 
2,746 
14,300 
2,831 
13,500 
2,751 
14,350 
2,836 
13,550 
2,756 
14,400 
2,841 
13,600 
2,761 
14,450 
2,846 
13,650 
2,766 
14,500 
2,851 
13,700 
2,771 
14,550 
2,856 
13,750 
2,776 
14,600 
2,861 
13,800 
2,781 
14,650 
2,866 
13,850 
2,786 
14,700 
2,871 
13,900 
2,791 
14,750 
2,876 
13,950 
2,796 
14,800 
2,881 
14,000 
2,801 
14,850 
2,886 
14,050 
2,806 
14,900 
2,891 
14,100 
2,811 
14,950 
2,896 
14,150 
2,816 
15,000 or more 
2,901.] 
 
 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
 
TABLE D 
 
(See Paragraph 14) 
 
Return of contribution on exit from the employment 
 
 
Months of Service 
Proportion of wages at exit 
Months of Service 
Proportion of wages at exit 
1 
                      0.08 
34 
                      2.82 
2 
                      0.17 
35 
                      2.90 
3 
                      0.25 
36 
                      2.98 
4 
                      0.33 
37 
                      3.06 
5 
                      0.42 
38 
                      3.15 
6 
                      0.51 
39 
                      3.23 
7 
                      0.60 
40 
                      3.32 
8 
                      0.68 
41 
                      3.40 
9 
                      0.77 
42 
                      3.49 
10 
                      0.85 
43 
                      3.57 
11 
                      0.94 
44 
                      3.65 
12 
                      1.02 
45 
                      3.74 
13 
                      1.10 
46 
                      3.82 
14 
                      1.18 
47 
                      3.91 
15 
                      1.26 
48 
                      3.99 
16 
                      1.34 
49 
                      4.08 
17 
                      1.42 
50 
                      4.16 
18 
                      1.51 
51 
                      4.25 
19 
                      1.59 
52 
                      4.33 
20 
                      1.67 
53 
                      4.42 
21 
                      1.75 
54 
                      4.51 
22 
                      1.83 
55 
                      4.59 
23 
                      1.91 
56 
                      4.68 
24 
                      1.99 
57 
                      4.76 
25 
                      2.07 
58 
                      4.85 
26 
                      2.16 
59 
                      4.93 
27 
                      2.24 
60 
                      5.02 
28 
                      2.32 
61 
                      5.11 
29 
                      2.40 
62 
                      5.20 
30 
                      2.49 
63 
                      5.28 
31 
                      2.57 
64 
                      5.37 
32 
                      2.65 
65 
                      5.46 
33 
                      2.73 
66 
                      5.55 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
67 
                      5.63 
91 
                      7.77 
68 
                      5.72 
92 
                      7.86 
69 
                      5.81 
93 
                      7.95 
70 
                      5.90 
94 
                      8.04 
71 
                      5.98 
95 
                      8.13 
72 
                      6.07 
96 
                      8.22 
73 
                      6.16 
97 
                      8.31 
74 
                      6.25 
98 
                      8.41 
75 
                      6.34 
99 
                      8.50 
76 
                      6.42 
100 
                      8.59 
77 
                      6.51 
101 
                      8.68 
78 
                      6.60 
102 
                      8.78 
79 
                      6.69 
103 
                      8.87 
80 
                      6.78 
104 
                      8.96 
81 
                      6.87 
105 
                      9.05 
82 
                      6.95 
106 
                      9.15 
83 
                      7.04 
107 
                      9.24 
84 
                      7.13 
108 
                      9.33 
85 
                      7.22 
109 
                      9.33 
86 
                      7.31 
110 
                      9.33 
87 
                      7.40 
111 
                      9.33 
88 
                      7.49 
112 
                      9.33 
89 
                      7.58 
113 
                      9.33 
90 
                      7.68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
[Inserted vide G.S.R.326(E) dated 14.06.2024 w.e.f.14.06.2024] 
 

 
23-12-2024 15:50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE –E 
 
(See Paragraph 39-B) 
 
(TRANSFER OF CONTRIBUTION FROM EMPLOYEES’ PENSION SCHEME, 1995 TO EXEMPTED 
OR OTHER PENSION FUND OR VICE –VERSA) 
 
 
 
Number 
of 
full 
year's 
contribution period 
Proportion of pay payable on 
last contribution month 
Number 
of 
full 
year's 
contribution period 
Proportion of pay payable 
on last contribution month 
1 
0.987 
13 
14.841 
2 
1.998 
14 
16.182 
3 
3.033 
15 
17.554 
4 
4.093 
16 
18.96 
5 
5.178 
17 
20.399 
6 
6.289 
18 
21.872 
7 
7.426 
19 
23.38 
8 
8.59 
20 
24.924 
9 
9.782 
21 
26.505 
10 
11.003 
22 
28.123 
11 
12.252 
23 
29.78 
12 
13.531 
24 
31.477

[FORMS_REFERENCED]
None

[RELATED_QUERIES]
None
---
